---
layout: earthstory
title: How well do you know the world?
modified:
categories: blog main earth-story
share: true
excerpt:
tags: earthstory
image:
  feature: /earth-story/maps.jpg
  teaser: /earth-story/maps.jpg
  thumb: /earth-story/maps.jpg
  credit: Wikimedia
  creditlink: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/ed/Reversed_Earth_map_1000x500.jpg
ads: false
original: https://www.facebook.com/TheEarthStory/photos/a.352867368107647.80532.352857924775258/856260601101652/?type=1
date: 2015-04-04T12:00:00
---

We all use maps. In the age of GPS and Google Maps, they're just a few taps away. But how often does your interaction with a map go beyond 'Where is the nearest coffee shop?' When did you last step back and look at the world? And what is it that you're actually looking at?

It's all a matter of perspective. For example, why is North up? The short answer is that there is no good reason - it's just the way it is. Stuart McArthur took issue with Australia being the land 'down under', and came up with his upside-down 'Universal Corrective Map' to challenge how people thought about the world.

Maps have been around for millennia. Early maps were simple diagrams of landmarks and navigational aids - a practical means of finding your way around without a guide. Their scale reflected the small worlds that people lived in. As humans began to explore the world, their horizons expanded and maps got more complex. Oceans and land masses began to take shape, but the edges of the maps were blank, warning off potential explorers with phrases like 'Here be dragons'. People thought the world was flat.

As early cartographers studied the world, they started to realise it wasn't flat. The idea of a spherical Earth began to emerge in ancient Greece, but wasn't widely adopted until the Middle Ages, and wasn't 'proved' until Magellan circumnavigated the Earth in the early 16th Century. Now we know that the Earth isn't a sphere - more of an ellipsoid, which we call an 'oblate spheroid'. This requires a complete shift in perspective, and presents an interesting problem: how do you represent the surface of an oblate spheroid on a flat map?

There are two ways to do this. The first is to 'cut up' the map, so you end up with lots of fragments, all on the same scale. This is geographically accurate, but is practically useless in the everyday world - navigating on many disjointed map fragments is a real headache. The more popular method is to stretch the surface of the sphere onto a grid. The evenly spaced lines of latitude (which circumnavigate the globe, parallel to the equator) stay the same, and you stretch out all the lines of longitude (which converge at the north to the south poles) so they are also parallel. This is the map most of you will be familiar with, and is called the Mercator projection. There are many subtle variations, but the one you will be most familiar with is the Web Mercator projection - established by Google in 2005, and now the standard for online maps.

In a Mercator projection vertical distances are correct, but as you move north or south from the equator everything is stretched horizontally. At the 'coffee shop' scale, this makes almost no difference, but at the global scale the differences are enormous. So enormous that most people's sense of how big the countries of the world are is completely wrong.

If you're wondering how well you know the world, [**play this little game**](http://goo.gl/ekdVw)

This game gives you the outlines of 15 countries, and asks you to place them on a Web Mercator map. Watch how their size and shape changes as you move them around the map. Hint: Greenland is really quite small, and all those 'little' African countries? Not that little!


######Further Reading:
* [Some funky map projections](http://goo.gl/T8omrA)
