---
layout: media
title: "Git"
modified:
categories: blog main code
share: true
excerpt:
tags: science code
image:
  feature: /git/git_header.png
  teaser: /git/git_teaser.png
  thumb: git/git_thumb.png
ads: false
date: 2014-01-07T21:00:00
---

I’m not insulting you all. Honest. I may be in the throes of writing my thesis, but I’m not quite at the stage of hating everyone and everything… give me another week, I reckon.

This is about something I’ve discovered while writing, which is incredibly boring, but even more useful. If you’re hoping to read something interesting or enlightening, stop here: geeks only beyond this point!

So the thing: [git](http://git-scm.com/).

Git is a version control system, originally designed to enable the development of Linux, which is actively worked on by thousands of people. It is piece of software that keeps track of your projects, and the changes you make in them. It goes something like this: My Thesis, a big, amorphous mass of latex files, figures and references: 992 files and counting. I plod along, doing my work, and every so often tell git to update. This is like saving your work, but better. Each document is saved, but also *every change you’ve made to every document*. If you, say, get drunk and attempt to edit a chapter, you can open up git the next morning, review the results of your ‘editing’ line by line, and undo all the terrible harm you did the night before with a single click!  Brilliant!

OK, so that’s a silly example. In reality, this is incredibly useful for coding projects: data analysis, mining, programming. Every change you make to the code in a session is recorded line-by-line, so you can undo those bright ideas that break everything. Even better, you can ‘branch’ your project – like a tree! If you suddenly have a wild idea and want to go off an try it, you can – just create a branch of your project, and edit away to your hearts content without messing up the original ‘trunk’. If any of your wild branchings turn out to be useful, you can merge them back into the trunk later.

This ability to ‘branch’ code makes git great for collaborative work.  You can save your git ‘repository’ online somewhere, and everyone involved can get involved with it, tinker, and not keep over-writing each others work. This ability to save the repository in an online, super-safe location, also makes a git-enabled project the mother of all backups.

To anyone familiar with git, I’m painfully aware that this description is childishly basic, and barely scratches the surface… but hey, it’s a start, and I’m learning!  Anyone in my position, who works on big, complicated projects with lots of incremental changes that have the potential to break everything, have a go – it will change your life!

To get you going, here are some simple steps:

1. Download and install [git](http://git-scm.com/downloads/).
2. Download a GUI for git – I’ve been having a good time with [SourceTree](http://www.sourcetreeapp.com/) (free), but there are many [other options](http://git-scm.com/downloads/guis).
3. Start a git project! You can do this from SourceTree, or via the command line (cd to your project folder, and type “git init”. You can then control git from SourceTree (managing projects and branches, ‘staging’ files and ‘committing’ your changes), or do it all from the command line if you really want to get to grips with the program.

For reference, the [git documentation pages](http://git-scm.com/doc) are mostly excellent, and have some good 'getting started' material.

It’s also worth mentioning that git plays nicely with various text editors. I use the curios [SublimeText](http://www.sublimetext.com/) editor, combined with the hilariously named [SublimeGit](https://sublimegit.net/) plugin, which allows me to control everything about git alongside my writing/coding. Woop!

OK. Geeking over. Something more interesting next time, I promise…
